Documentation: added a scale-up doc. (#606)
gardener/etcd-druid: docs/concepts/scale-up.md

> ## Scaling-up the single-node to multi-node etcd cluster deployed by etcd-druid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scaling-up a single-node etcd cluster to a multi-node etcd cluster deployed by etcd-druid
```

> To mark the cluster for scale-up from single node to multi-node etcd just patch the etcd custom resource's `.spec.replicas` from `1` to `3`(say).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To mark a cluster for scale-up from single node to multi-node etcd, just patch the etcd custom resource's `.spec.replicas` from `1` to `3` (for example).
```

### Challenges for scale-up

> 1. Etcd cluster with single replica don't have any peer, so no peer communication is required hence peerUrl may or may not be TLS enabled but while scaling up from single node etcd to multi-node etcd cluster there will be a requirement to have a peer communication between each members of etcd cluster. Peer communication is required for various reasons like to get in a sync with each other cluster state, data and to perform leader election or any cluster wide operation like to remove/add a member etc. Hence in multi-node etcd cluster we need to have TLS enable peer url for peer communication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Etcd cluster with single replica don't have any peers, so no peer communication is required hence peerURL may or may not be TLS enabled. However while scaling up from single node etcd to multi-node etcd, there will be a requirement to have peer communication between members of the cluster. Peer communication is required for various reasons, for instance for members to sync up cluster state and data, and to perform leader election or any other cluster wide operation like removal or addition of a member etc. Hence in multi-node etcd cluster we need to have TLS enable peer URLs for peer communication.
```

> 2. Providing the correct configuration to start a new etcd members as it is different from boostrapping a cluster since this new etcd members will join the existing cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Providing the correct configuration to start a new etcd members as it is different from boostrapping a cluster since this new etcd members will join an existing cluster.
```

### Approach

> We first went through the etcd doc of [update-advertise-peer-urls](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.4/op-guide/runtime-configuration/#update-advertise-peer-urls) to find out information regarding to update peerUrl. Interestingly etcd doc have mentioned this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We first went through the etcd doc of [update-advertise-peer-urls](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.4/op-guide/runtime-configuration/#update-advertise-peer-urls) to find out information regarding peerURL updation. Interestingly, etcd doc has mentioned the following:
```

```
To update the advertise peer URLs of a member, first update it explicitly via member command and then restart the member.
```

> But we can't assume peerUrl is not TLS enabled for single-node cluster as it depends on end-user, user may or may not enable the TLS for peerUrl for single node etcd cluster. so, How to detect whether peerUrl was enabled or not when cluster is marked for scale-up ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But we can't assume peerURL is not TLS enabled for single-node cluster as it depends on the end-user. A user may or may not enable TLS for peerURL of a single node etcd cluster. So, how do we detect whether peerURL was enabled or not when cluster is marked for scale-up ?
```

> ### Detection of peerUrl TLS enabled or not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Detecting if peerURL TLS is enabled or not
```

> For this we have used member lease annotation `member.etcd.gardener.cloud/tls-enabled` set by backup-restore sidecar of etcd. As etcd configuration is provided by backup-restore, so backup-restore can find out whether TLS is enabled or not and accordingly set this annotation `member.etcd.gardener.cloud/tls-enabled: "true"` or `member.etcd.gardener.cloud/tls-enabled: "false"` in member lease object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this we use an annotation in the member lease `member.etcd.gardener.cloud/tls-enabled` set by backup-restore sidecar of etcd. As etcd configuration is provided by backup-restore, it can find out whether TLS is enabled or not and accordingly from the configuration and set this annotation `member.etcd.gardener.cloud/tls-enabled:` to either `true` or `false` in member lease object.
```

And with the help of this annotation and config-map values etcd-druid is able to detect whether there is a change in a peerUrl or not.

### Etcd-Druid helps in scaling up etcd cluster

> Now, we have detected whether peerUrl was TLS enabled or not for single node etcd cluster. Now, etcd-druid will use this information to take action:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, it is detected whether peerURL was TLS enabled or not for single node etcd cluster. Etcd-druid can now use this information to take action:
```

> - If peerUrl was already TLS enabled then no action is required from etcd-druid side, etcd-druid can proceed for scaling up the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If peerURL was already TLS enabled then no action is required from etcd-druid side. Etcd-druid can proceed with scaling up the cluster.
```

> - If peerUrl was not TLS enabled then etcd-druid have to intervene to make sure peerUrl should be TLS enabled first for the single node before marking the cluster for scale-up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If peerURL was not TLS enabled then etcd-druid has to intervene and make sure that peerURL is first TLS enabled for the single node before marking the cluster for scale-up.
```

Please change all further occurrences of `peerUrl` to `peerURL`

Author: > Please change all further occurrences of peerUrl to peerURL

IMO, peerUrl seems correct as it follows camelCase.

Reviewer: `URL` is an abbreviation and usually should be capitalised, but I'll leave it up to you

Author: make sense. done

### Action taken by etcd-druid to enable the peerUrl TLS

> 1. Etcd-druid will updates the `etcd-bootstrap` config-map with new config like initial-cluster,initial-advertise-peer-urls etc. Backup-restore will detect this change and updates the member lease annotation to `member.etcd.gardener.cloud/tls-enabled: "true"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Etcd-druid will updates the `etcd-bootstrap` config-map with new config like initial-cluster,initial-advertise-peer-urls etc. Backup-restore will detect this change and update the member lease annotation to `member.etcd.gardener.cloud/tls-enabled: "true"`.
```

> 2. In case the peerUrl TLS has been changed to `enabled`: Etcd-druid will adds tasks to the deployment flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In case the peerUrl TLS has been changed to `enabled`: Etcd-druid adds tasks to the deployment flow.
```

Author: first point is also using future tense, IMO `will` make more sense here.

Reviewer: Okay, then change this to the following
```suggestion
2. In case the peerUrl TLS has been changed to `enabled`: Etcd-druid will add tasks to the deployment flow.
```

    - To ensure that the TLS enablement of peerUrl is properly reflected in etcd, the existing etcd StatefulSet pods should be restarted twice. 

>     - First restart pushes a new configuration which contains PeerUrlTLS configuration. Backup-restore will update the member peer url.This will result in the change of the peer url in the etcd's database, but it may not reflect in the already running etcd container. Ideally a restart of an etcd container would have been sufficient but currently k8s doesn't expose an API to force restart a single container within a pod. Therefore, we need to restart the StatefulSet pod(s) once again. When the pod(s) is restarted the second time it will now start etcd with the correct peer url which will be TLS enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - The first restart pushes a new configuration which contains PeerUrlTLS configuration. Backup-restore will update the member peer url. This will result in a change of the peer url in the etcd's database, but it may not reflect in the already running etcd container. Ideally a restart of an etcd container would have been sufficient but currently k8s doesn't expose an API to force restart of a single container within a pod. Therefore, we need to restart the StatefulSet pod(s) once again. When the pod(s) is restarted the second time it will now start etcd with the correct peer url which will be TLS enabled.
```

        * Once the update is successfully completed, then we delete StatefulSet pods, causing a restart by the StatefulSet controller.

### After PeerUrl is TLS enabled
After peerUrl TLS enablement for single node etcd cluster, now etcd-druid adds a scale-up annotation: `gardener.cloud/scaled-to-multi-node` to etcd statefulset and etcd-druid will patches the statefulset `.spec.replicas` to `3`(say), now statefulset controller will bring up new pods(etcd with backup-restore as a sidecar). Now etcd's sidecar i.e backup-restore will check whether this member is already a part of cluster or not and incase it is unable to check (may be due to some network issues) then backup-restore checks presence of this annotation: `gardener.cloud/scaled-to-multi-node` in etcd statefulset to detect scale-up if it finds out it is the scale-up case then backup-restore adds new etcd member as a [learner](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/learning/learner/) first then start the etcd learner by providing the correct configuration. Once learner is get in sync with etcd cluster leader, then learner will get promoted to voting member.

### Providing the correct etcd config

> As backup-restore has detected that it a scale-up scenario, now backup-restore calculates `initial-cluster-state` to `existing` as this member will join the existing cluster and it calculates rest of the config from updated config-map provided by etcd-druid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As backup-restore detects that it a scale-up scenario, backup-restore sets `initial-cluster-state` to `existing` as this member will join an existing cluster and it calculates the rest of the config from updated config-map provided by etcd-druid.
```

## Scaling-up a single-node to multi-node etcd cluster deployed by etcd-druid

To mark a cluster for scale-up from single node to multi-node etcd, just patch the etcd custom resource's `.spec.replicas` from `1` to `3` (for example).

### Challenges for scale-up

> 1. Etcd cluster with single replica don't have any peers, so no peer communication is required hence peerUrl may or may not be TLS enabled. However, while scaling up from single node etcd to multi-node etcd, there will be a requirement to have a peer communication between members of etcd cluster. Peer communication is required for various reasons for instance for members to sync up cluster state, data and to perform leader election or any cluster wide operation like to removal or addition of a member etc. Hence in multi-node etcd cluster we need to have TLS enable peerUrl for peer communication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Etcd cluster with single replica don't have any peers, so no peer communication is required hence peerUrl may or may not be TLS enabled. However, while scaling up from single node etcd to multi-node etcd, there will be a requirement to have peer communication between members of the etcd cluster. Peer communication is required for various reasons, for instance for members to sync up cluster state, data, and to perform leader election or any cluster wide operation like removal or addition of a member etc. Hence in multi-node etcd cluster we need to have TLS enable peerUrl for peer communication.
```

> 1. Etcd cluster with single replica don't have any peers, so no peer communication is required hence peer URL may or may not be TLS enabled. However, while scaling up from single node etcd to multi-node etcd, there will be a requirement to have peer communication between members of the etcd cluster. Peer communication is required for various reasons, for instance for members to sync up cluster state, data, and to perform leader election or any cluster wide operation like to removal or addition of a member etc. Hence in multi-node etcd cluster we need to have TLS enable peer URL for peer communication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Etcd cluster with single replica don't have any peers, so no peer communication is required hence peer URL may or may not be TLS enabled. However, while scaling up from single node etcd to multi-node etcd, there will be a requirement to have peer communication between members of the etcd cluster. Peer communication is required for various reasons, for instance for members to sync up cluster state, data, and to perform leader election or any cluster wide operation like removal or addition of a member etc. Hence in a multi-node etcd cluster we need to have TLS enable peer URL for peer communication.
```

> 2. Providing the correct configuration to start a new etcd members as it is different from boostrapping a cluster since this new etcd members will join an existing cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Providing the correct configuration to start new etcd members as it is different from boostrapping a cluster since these new etcd members will join an existing cluster.
```

### Approach
We first went through the etcd doc of [update-advertise-peer-urls](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.4/op-guide/runtime-configuration/#update-advertise-peer-urls) to find out information regarding peerUrl updation. Interestingly, etcd doc has mentioned the following:
```
To update the advertise peer URLs of a member, first update it explicitly via member command and then restart the member.
```

> But we can't assume peerUrl is not TLS enabled for single-node cluster as it depends on end-user. A user may or may not enable the TLS for peerUrl for a single node etcd cluster. so, How do we detect whether peerUrl was enabled or not when cluster is marked for scale-up ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But we can't assume peerUrl is not TLS enabled for single-node cluster as it depends on end-user. A user may or may not enable the TLS for peerUrl for a single node etcd cluster. So, How do we detect whether peerUrl was enabled or not when cluster is marked for scale-up?
```

### Detecting if peerURL TLS is enabled or not
For this we use an annotation in member lease object `member.etcd.gardener.cloud/tls-enabled` set by backup-restore sidecar of etcd. As etcd configuration is provided by backup-restore, so it can find out whether TLS is enabled or not and accordingly set this annotation `member.etcd.gardener.cloud/tls-enabled` to either `true` or `false` in member lease object.
And with the help of this annotation and config-map values etcd-druid is able to detect whether there is a change in a peerUrl or not.

### Etcd-Druid helps in scaling up etcd cluster
Now, it is detected whether peerUrl was TLS enabled or not for single node etcd cluster. Etcd-druid can now use this information to take action:
- If peerUrl was already TLS enabled then no action is required from etcd-druid side. Etcd-druid can proceed with scaling up the cluster.
- If peerUrl was not TLS enabled then etcd-druid has to intervene and make sure peerUrl should be TLS enabled first for the single node before marking the cluster for scale-up.

### Action taken by etcd-druid to enable the peerUrl TLS

> 1. Etcd-druid will updates the `etcd-bootstrap` config-map with new config like initial-cluster,initial-advertise-peer-urls etc. Backup-restore will detect this change and update the member lease annotation to `member.etcd.gardener.cloud/tls-enabled: "true"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Etcd-druid will update the `etcd-bootstrap` config-map with new config like initial-cluster,initial-advertise-peer-urls etc. Backup-restore will detect this change and update the member lease annotation to `member.etcd.gardener.cloud/tls-enabled: "true"`.
```

    - To ensure that the TLS enablement of peerUrl is properly reflected in etcd, the existing etcd StatefulSet pods should be restarted twice. 
    - The first restart pushes a new configuration which contains PeerUrlTLS configuration. Backup-restore will update the member peer url. This will result in the change of the peer url in the etcd's database, but it may not reflect in the already running etcd container. Ideally a restart of an etcd container would have been sufficient but currently k8s doesn't expose an API to force restart a single container within a pod. Therefore, we need to restart the StatefulSet pod(s) once again. When the pod(s) is restarted the second time it will now start etcd with the correct peer url which will be TLS enabled.
    - To achieve 2 restarts following is done:
        * An update is made to the spec mounting the peer URL TLS secrets. This will cause a rolling update of the existing pod.
        * Once the update is successfully completed, then we delete StatefulSet pods, causing a restart by the StatefulSet controller.

### After PeerUrl is TLS enabled

> After peerUrl TLS enablement for single node etcd cluster, now etcd-druid adds a scale-up annotation: `gardener.cloud/scaled-to-multi-node` to etcd statefulset and etcd-druid will patches the statefulset `.spec.replicas` to `3`(say), now statefulset controller will bring up new pods(etcd with backup-restore as a sidecar). Now etcd's sidecar i.e backup-restore will check whether this member is already a part of cluster or not and incase it is unable to check (may be due to some network issues) then backup-restore checks presence of this annotation: `gardener.cloud/scaled-to-multi-node` in etcd statefulset to detect scale-up if it finds out it is the scale-up case then backup-restore adds new etcd member as a [learner](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/learning/learner/) first then start the etcd learner by providing the correct configuration. Once learner is get in sync with etcd cluster leader, then learner will get promoted to voting member.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After peerUrl TLS enablement for single node etcd cluster, etcd-druid adds a scale-up annotation: `gardener.cloud/scaled-to-multi-node` to the etcd statefulset and will patch the statefulsets `.spec.replicas` to `3`(for example). The statefulset controller will then bring up new pods(etcd with backup-restore as a sidecar). Now etcd's sidecar i.e backup-restore will check whether this member is already a part of a cluster or not and incase it is unable to check (may be due to some network issues) then backup-restore checks presence of this annotation: `gardener.cloud/scaled-to-multi-node` in etcd statefulset to detect scale-up. If it finds out it is the scale-up case then backup-restore adds new etcd member as a [learner](https://etcd.io/docs/v3.3/learning/learner/) first and then starts the etcd learner by providing the correct configuration. Once the learner gets in sync with the etcd cluster leader, it will get promoted to a voting member.
```

### Providing the correct etcd config

> As backup-restore detects that it a scale-up scenario, backup-restore sets `initial-cluster-state` to `existing` as this member will join an existing cluster and it calculates the rest of the config from updated config-map provided by etcd-druid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As backup-restore detects that it is a scale-up scenario, backup-restore sets `initial-cluster-state` to `existing` as this member will join an existing cluster and it calculates the rest of the config from the updated config-map provided by etcd-druid.
```

![Sequence diagram](images/scale-up-sequenceDiagram.png)

#### Future improvements:

> Need to restart etcd pods twice will change in the future. please refer: https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/issues/538

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The need of restartint etcd pods twice will change in the future. please refer: https://github.com/gardener/etcd-backup-restore/issues/538
```
